---
title: 'Acessing alternative data - automotive recalls'
date: '2024-12-31'
description: >-
  A python package for retreiving automotive recalls, and an application of event-based trading strategies.
categories: ['Trading Strategies']
tags: ['Python']
---

### **Background**

During the final year of my undergraduate degree at McGill I wanted to gain more pratical experience in investment management. As such, I enrolled in a course called Applied Investments. The course was a year long and involved students developing, implementing and refining an active investment strategy. A unique aspect of this course, is that the students managed real money. More precisely, a portion of the endowment which was allocated to the course for students to manage. My group and I managed ~250,000CAD. 

The purpose of this post is not to describe the investment strategy itself but instead highlight a package which I developed to help streamline the data retrieval process. However, to provide a brief summary of our strategy, we believed that large automotive recalls would create temporary negative price effects on the automotive companies stock price. If you wish, you can read more about the strategy and its empirical result [here](https://github.com/thomaswcole/FINE541/blob/master/Group4_FinalReport_Dec2023.pdf).

### **The Data**

To execute our trading strategy we required consistent access to up to date recall information. Fortunately, the automotive industry is highly regulated and thus requires strict reporting. As a result, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which is a department of the US Government, provides an API to allow users to search for recalls placed on their vehicle. 

The issue with this is that while their API provides the ability to search by Make, Model, Year or even VIN, there is no direct way to understand which recalls have been entered today or even to aggregate all of this information.

As such, I wrote a Python package called [recalls](https://github.com/thomaswcole/recall), which allows a user to do just this. Below I detail how one might use this.

### **Usage**

You can pip install the package as follows:

```bash
pip install nhtsa-recall-fetcher
```

Then, you can access recall data using the following code:

```python
nthsa = NHTSA()
recalls = nhtsa.get_recalls_by_make_model_year('Toyota', 'Camry', '2010')
```

Or you can access all makes for a given model as follows:

```python
nthsa = NHTSA()
makes = nhtsa.get_all_makes()
```

To access and record daily recalls, one might consider compiling a database of make, model and year for each combination and then storing the database results. 





