---
title: 'The game of 24 - a short analysis and some strategies'
date: '2025-06-30'
categories: ['Counting']
use_math: True
math: True
---

### Introduction

Before moving to New York and starting grad school, I hadn’t spent much time using subway systems, my commute during undergrad in Montreal was a mere 15 minute walk. In New York, I wasn’t as lucky - so I found myself spending a significant amount of time in the subway system, where cellular service is spotty at best. Sure, there’s a bunch of things I could do, read papers, read a book, listen to music but sometimes I also look for a game on my phone. One big downside is a lot of games require internet service, so I needed to find one that was sufficiently interesting, required no cell service, and I'd be able to get at least a few weeks out of it.

### The Game of 24

Eventually I came across what I’ll refer to as the game of 24. It’s fairly simple and perhaps boring to those who are uninterested testing their simple arithmetic. 

The game is as follows. You’re given 4 numbers and you need to apply operations to these numbers; addition, subtraction, multiplication or division, such that the end result is 24. For example, if you’re given 4,6,2,1. You could input:

$$
4*6*(2-1) = 24*1 = 24.
$$

That’s it. That’s all there is to the game. So why are you reading this, and why am I writing it? The game itself has 1200 levels total, 400 “easy”, 400 “medium” levels, 400 “hard” levels. However, in my experience, 800/1200 levels completed so far, the difficulty is not always commensurate with the amount of time it takes me to solve them, with most taking me around 5-10 seconds. I have a few questions in mind that I’d like to answer, which serve two main purposes to me. The first, how many more levels could I solve, 1200 seems arbitrary and is surely not the limit. The second, how can I improve my current strategy to solve questions faster. Here’s a list of the main questions I’m hoping to answer throughout this post, which should help me with the above. 

- How can I quantify easy, medium and hard questions? How many of each type are there?
- Which numbers after often pair together? For example, 6x4 or 8x3 appear fairly often. 
- Which numbers quadruples have the most solutions?

### A preliminary thought exercise

Let’s first note that, in the way the current game was developed, the same number can appear multiple times in your board. For example, 4,4,8,1 is a valid starting board and indeed has a solution (4*4*1+ 8).

A natural first step is to ask how many boards we can create? This itself is a fairly simple counting exercise; we have 12 choices for each number, and to create each solution, we need to choose 3 operators, from a selection of 4. This leads us to 

$$
12x4x12x4x12x4x12 = 12^4*4^4  
$$

possible combinations. 

Is that it? No. Order of operations matters, so we need to also place parentheses. It’s not difficult to reason, there’s 5 ways to place these parentheses. So we end up with 

$$
5*12^4*4^4 = 6,635,520
$$

possible ways to add, subtract, multiply and divide 4 numbers to arrive at some result. Of course, not all of these are equal to 24.

Okay, let’s write to simple Python code to generate all of these combinations, and the verify those that correctly add to 24.

CODE

The result, _ number of possible solutions to the 24 game. This represents % of the total number of combinations we previously calculated. 

Okay but some of these use the same combination of numbers, so let’s group them by the numbers they use. The below shows the groupings with the most amount of possible solutions. 

Histogram.

Now let’s look at the distribution of number of solutions. 

Count of solutions distribution. 

### Classifying Difficulty 

Now, let’s try to define what an easy, medium, or hard problem is. In my opinion, and what I feel is most logical-  the difficulty of the problem should be related to the number of possible solutions, so we will use this as our only feature.


##### 1. Thresholding

Perhaps the first logical approach, and maybe the one that was used in creation of the game was simply to group problems by the number of solutions. For example, we could consider all of the problems with 20 solutions to be difficult, while those with between 20 and 40 solutions "medium", and anything beyond that as easy. 

If we used this rule, the count of easy, medium and hard problems would be as follows. 

COUNT TABLE HERE FOR EASY THRESHOLDING

#### 2. K-means

Now, since our goal was to label the problems according to easy, medium and hard, we could perform a supervised learning method known as k-means clustering. The formulation of k-means is given here for a refresher.

- Kmeans refersher.

While we have already pre-determined chosen the number of clusters to be 3, we can confirm this is a good choice by looking at the Elbow plot.

ELBOW PLOT HERE

This seems to suggest that perhaps two would be a better choice, but of course an elbow plot is largely subjective anyway and three also looks to be reasonable. The count of number of solutions by classification level is given below.

COUNT OF SOLUTIONS


#### 3. Hierachical Clustering

Finally, as was suggested by our previous elbow plot and my intuition when playing the game - three difficulty levels seems to be incorrect. So, as a final look at the classification of these problems, we'll look at performing hierarcichal clustering on the data. The dendogram is shown below.

*DENDOGRAM*


This is perhaps a better visual of whats going on, we can see that our data is really split into 2 "difficulty" levels, and splitting beyond this doesn't provide much additional benefit. That said, however, the split on the right perhaps suggest an "easy +" difficulty, rather than a truly medium set of problems.


### Identifying Strategies



